Open source session replay / Hotjar alternatives blog (#3278)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/free-open-source-alternatives-hotjar-fullstory-logrocket.md

---

> date: 2022-04-05

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2022-04-07
```

rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-company-culture-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
author: ["hanna-crombie"]
categories: ["Guides", "Product analytics"]
---

Most analytics tools have one goal in mind: providing actionable insights on user behavior. It's all about hard numbers; views, clicks, conversions. But sometimes all those numbers can feel a bit sterile. Separated from the individual user narrative, statistics are an incomplete picture. Enter session recording.

### Why you need session recording

Session recordings, also known as session replays, are video renderings of actions taken by your users in real-time. They capture mouse movement, clicks, taps, and scrolling across your site or app’s pages.

Aside from making for some fascinating watching, recordings facilitate a detailed investigation of user behavior, allowing you to identify friction areas such as: 

- Where users are getting stuck on your site
- Hesitation at different stages of your funnel
- How bugs come about
- How your users are interacting with individual elements of your product.

> This information in context can help you to optimize user experience, build user-led products and, ultimately, improve conversion and retention. Session recording is a great tool to have in your arsenal when you want to act on real world user data.

Author: ```suggestion
This context can help you to optimize user experience, build user-led products and, ultimately, improve conversion and retention. Session recording is an essential tool for making better products.
```

> ### Self-hosted vs. cloud session recording

Author: ```suggestion
### Why self-host your session recording?
```

> Cloud session recording tools like Hotjar, FullStory and LogRocket can offer a convenient solution for users who want to kick off quickly. That said, the costs associated with cloud-hosting are an important factor to consider, not to mention the privacy concerns that come hand-in-hand with third-party providers.

Author: ```suggestion
Most popular session recording tools, such as  Hotjar, FullStory and LogRocket, are exclusively cloud-based. This is convenient, but comes with several drawbacks:

1. They're expensive
2. You don't control your user data
3. GDPR and HIPAA privacy compliance is complicated 
```

Negotiating the security impact of hosting your data in the cloud can be a headache to say the least, particularly when searching for solutions that help you to stay compliant with [GDPR](https://posthog.com/blog/best-gdpr-compliant-analytics-tools) or [HIPAA](https://posthog.com/blog/best-hipaa-compliant-analytics-tools) regulations. If sending data to third-party systems is of concern, a self-hosted option may well be the most convenient way to go.

Open source software gives you the freedom to study, modify and run the tools you are using freely. By implementing a self-hosted version of session recording, you can ensure all of your data remains on your platform.

Here, we’ve got the lowdown on some of the best open source and self-hosted session recording tools available, so you can choose the right one for you.

## 1. [PostHog](https://posthog.com/)
![PostHog - open source product analytics replay](../images/blog/open-source-hotjar-alternatives/img1_PostHog.png)

> PostHog is an all-in-one product analytics platform which empowers any business to make efficient data-driven decisions. It offers all the tools required to measure user success and build better products, including feature flags, funnels, [session recording](https://posthog.com/product/session-recording), heat maps, A/B testing, trends and much more. PostHog’s tools work together natively, offering extensive, actionable user insights.

Author: ```suggestion
PostHog is an all-in-one product analytics platform that offers all the tools required to measure user success and build better products, including but not limited to [session recording](https://posthog.com/product/session-recording). Other features include Feature Flags, Funnels, Heat Maps, A/B testing, Trends and much more. All of PostHog’s tools work together natively, offering extensive, actionable user insights beyond what's possible with standalone session replay tools.
```

### Who is PostHog for?

PostHog is the best tool for product-minded developers, data engineers and product teams. The fully comprehensive suite of analytics tools make it an ideal choice for any company that wants to gain wide-ranging insights into their usage and engagement metrics while keeping all of their data in one manageable platform. The user interface is extremely intuitive and no SQL knowledge is required, making it very easy for all members of your team to pick up the tooling and build a better understanding of your users.

> We may be a little biased here, but you can sign up for free to see how the platform works for yourself!

Author: ```suggestion
Are we may be biased here? Yes. Are we wrong? We'll let you be the judge. As we're open source, you can [self-host PostHog for free](/signup). 
```

### Strengths

- Fully-featured product analytics suite

> - Unlimited scaling

Author: ```suggestion
- Unlimited scaling
- Session recording is a no cost feature
```

- Front-end events captured out of the box

> - Easy [migration](https://posthog.com/tutorials/free-hotjar-alternative) to your existing infrastructure

Author: ```suggestion
```

- CSS selectors block sensitive data to protect user privacy
- Customisable data retention

> - Enable session recording for specific user segments for more granular insights

Author: ```suggestion
- Enable session recording for specific user segments for more granular insights
- Session recording is a no additional cost feature
```

### How much does it cost?

> PostHog (self-hosted and cloud) is available for free up to 1 million captured events each month.

Author: ```suggestion
PostHog (self-hosted and cloud) free up to 1 million captured events each month when you enter card details.
```

> [Session recording](https://posthog.com/docs/user-guides/recordings) is included at no extra cost in both plans.

Author: ```suggestion
[Session recording](https://posthog.com/docs/user-guides/recordings) is included at no extra cost in all plans.
```

> Custom plans are also available for scaling and enterprise customers who are working with very large volumes of data. The transparent [pricing calculators](https://posthog.com/pricing?realm=self-hosted) allow you to see what you can expect to pay based on your event capture volume.

Author: ```suggestion
```

### Is it open source?

Yes! PostHog’s open source plans are available under an MIT license. Find out more about [PostHog’s self-hosting plans](https://posthog.com/signup/self-host).

## 2. [OpenReplay](https://openreplay.com/)
![OpenReplay - open source session replay](../images/blog/open-source-hotjar-alternatives/img2_OpenReplay.png)

> OpenReplay is an open source session replay stack which provides insights into user actions inside web apps. It does lack additional analysis tools to give a more cohesive view of the user experience at large and assist with optimized product development. 

Author: ```suggestion
OpenReplay is an open source session replay stack that provides insights into user actions inside web apps. It does lack additional analysis tools to give a more cohesive view of the user experience at large and assist with optimized product development. 
```

> Their tooling is particularly effective for application state and customer support however – features like DevTools and co-browsing sessions are useful for monitoring performance.

Author: ```suggestion
Its tooling is particularly effective for application state and customer support, howeve – features like DevTools and co-browsing sessions are useful for monitoring performance.
```

### Who is OpenReplay for?

OpenReplay is a developer-friendly tool. It allows engineers to see how users are interacting with their web apps and respond to issues faster.

### Strengths

- Co-browsing feature to assist users at critical moments
- Network activity inspection
- Performance and state monitoring
- Error tracking

### How much does it cost?

OpenReplay’s self-hosted plan is available for free.

> They also offer a cloud option starting at $3.95 per month for 1,000 recordings with 30 days data retention.

Author: ```suggestion
It also offers a cloud option starting at $3.95 per month for 1,000 recordings with 30 days data retention.
```

### Is it open source?

Yes. OpenReplay’s open source library is available under the ELv2 license, via [the OpenReplay repo](https://github.com/openreplay/openreplay).

## 3. [UXWizz](https://www.uxwizz.com/)
![UXWizz - self hosted session replay](../images/blog/open-source-hotjar-alternatives/img3_UXWizz.png)

UXWizz is a paired-down product analytics platform offering features like visitor insights, session recording, segments and A/B testing.

A lightweight version of session recording is available, which only stores the URL of the page and the user actions. This is designed to optimize your data storage and remove some of the manual maintenance otherwise required by UXWizz.

### Who is UXWizz for?

UXWizz’s is a good choice for individuals, and marketing and product teams in small businesses who want quick, qualitative insights into their user analytics from one simple and accessible dashboard.

### Strengths

- Broad range of engagement-focused insights
- Low database usage with lightweight version

### How much does it cost?

> UXWizz is available as a self-hosted solution only and pricing ranges from £79 to £1,199 for a lifetime license, including 1 year support. Additional updates and support are priced as add-on subscriptions.

Author: ```suggestion
UXWizz is available as a self-hosted solution only and pricing ranges from £79 to £1,199 for a lifetime license, including 1-year support. Additional updates and support are priced as add-on subscriptions.
```

### Is it open source?

No. UXWizz is not open source.

## 4. [UXlens](https://uxlens.com/)
![UXlens - self hosted session replay](../images/blog/open-source-hotjar-alternatives/img4_UXlens.png)

UXlens is a developer-first session recording tool which provides insight into user interface and conversion issues. It does not include any additional analytics tools, but includes useful segment filtering features that help businesses locate blocks in their funnel.

### Who is UXlens for?

UXlens is a good choice for UX designers and product teams who want to study the impact of their UI on the user journey.

### Strengths

- Customisable filters to track sessions on specific user segments
- Input elements masked by default to protect user data
- UI to assist with complex filter building

### How much does it cost?

> UXlens sessions recording tool is available as a self-hosted solution for free.

Author: ```suggestion
Self-hosting is free. A cloud-hosted version is also available starting at $5 per month.
```

> 
> A cloud-hosted version is also available starting at $5 per month.

Author: ```suggestion
```
